[GENTLE MUSIC]
>>JAMES COLQUHOUN: Hi.
It's James here
from "Food Matters,"
and I'm here today
with Sir Ken Robinson.
Ken is a researcher,
and academic.
He is an author of
"Creative Schools."
And he is a force for good
in championing the notion
that the non-academic components
of our education system
should be considered
with deep reverence
in terms of how they can help
culture, a new form of children
and humanity out in the
world solving the biggest
problems of today.
Sir Ken, how are you?
>>KEN: I'm great.
>>JAMES: Nice.
First of all, I'd
like to start, really,
at the beginning, really, the
founding time and the founding
era of education.
It was really sort of
in this industrial era
where we moved from
an idea and notion
that we'd be raised by our
parents in a community.
And we'd be taught what to
do, whether as a blacksmith,
or this, and follow our
parents' footsteps to going
into an education system.
Can you tell me
what was happening
at that time of our history
and how schools were created,
that founding intention?
>>KEN: Well, there have
always been schools.
People have always been able
to get themselves educated,
providing they could
pay for it, or they
were pursuing a
particular path in the UK,
for example, where I'm from.
But it was true
of most of Europe.
There were always opportunities
to become educated if you
wanted to enter the church.
And in fact, even
for a long time--
there were church schools.
There were opportunities
to be educated privately,
and the nobility always
provided for themselves
in that point of view.
So education is not
new by any means.
It traces its way back
in one form or another
to the beginning
of civilization.
What we're really talking
about are the growth
of systems of mass
public education,
and they really
have their origins
in most countries in
the mid-19th century.
Some earlier than
that, but really,
mass public education got off
the ground in the 19th century.
And by mass public education,
I mean systems of education
that were initiated by
central governments which
were available free at the point
of delivery, in most cases.
And energy costs were compulsory
for certain age groups.
I mean, really, historically,
they're relatively recent.
And I was born in 1950.
My dad was born in 1914.
When he was at
school, he left at 14,
so compulsory education
covered quite a narrow range
until it got to, in the UK, to
take that as an example, 1944,
when there was an
education act which
provided for
everyone to continue
in various sorts of schools.
And then they started to
raise the school-leaving age.
That became a
controversial issue.
But when I was at
school, people mainly
left the 15, unless you stayed
on to do some higher work
and you stayed until 18.
So it's relatively recent.
And these systems, in my view--
and I've written quite a bit
about it--
grew up in the interests of
the Industrial Revolution.
And to some degree,
in the image of it.
They grew up because
of a need, in part,
to create a mass workforce for
this huge industrial complex
that was evolving.
It's hard to overestimate
the impact of industrialism.
Of course, it has its
roots in the 18th century
and a little earlier as a
force of economic change.
But it led to a massive
shift in the way people
lived and worked.
The great majority of people
in Europe and in the Americas
lived and worked in the fields.
But with industrialism,
they started
to migrate into the cities
to work in the factories,
and to dig the roads,
and build the railways,
and create this massive
infrastructure that
was required.
And that needed a new
sort of workforce.
It needed people who were
literate to a certain degree,
who were numerate
to a certain degree.
But it really was divided
into several groups.
The vast majority of people
during the industrial period
were required to do manual
work, to tend the machines,
to wield the shovels, the
picks, and wield the hammers.
And a smaller group
were needed to do
all the administrative work
to keep that system running.
And in the case of Britain
and the other colonial powers,
there was the need for people to
go and administer the colonies
and to be educated with a
slightly different level as
well.
So what you had evolving
over that period
was a kind of pyramid.
There was a broad
base of people who
were being educated to a
certain level of basic numeracy
and literacy.
There was a group
slightly higher
than that who would be going
on to administrative work
and certain
managerial-type jobs.
And then a group
would be educated
to take on these sort of
higher leadership roles.
And the system was composed
in that image, a broad base
of elementary education,
a slightly narrow band
of high school, middle
school and high school,
and then quite a narrow
band of people who wanted
went on to university.
Because the rough equation
was that about 80% of people
were going to be selling their
physical labor and maybe 20%
would be selling their
intellectual labor,
and it was built that way.
So when I was going to school
in the 1950s, about one
in 20 people, I think,
went to university.
The vast majority people
left school at 15,
and a smaller group went on
to do higher exams with a view
to go into some kind of
university or higher-education
system.
So there was an
economic impulse.
That's the first thing.
The second thing
is that the system
was organized a bit on the
principles of mass production.
So people were selected
for certain routes.
The kids went through
the system by age group.
This was a massive invention
to put this system into place.
But children went in at a
certain age, four or five.
They went through by age groups.
They still do.
There are certain
points of selection
where some kids go that
way, some kids go that way.
In the British system, which
wasn't untypical for Europe,
people were selected according
to whether they were thought
to be more fit for manual work.
Maybe they might
have the spark they
thought was needed for academic
work or a particular interest
in that.
In the UK case, we were
selected at the age of 11
to do that on the
basis of an IQ test
of which we could say more.
But you were divided
into sheeps and goats.
And then a few people went onto
university as a consequence.
So the organizational
principle was
very similar to mass
production systems.
It was based on standardization,
conformity selection.
And it was also geared to
selecting a particular type
of commodity with a particular
sort of product at the far end.
And like any system of
mass industrial production,
it was predicated on generating
a fair amount of waste
materials, because not
every not everybody
was suited to the task that
they were being groomed for.
And so they went to one side.
And I think it was at
that point we invented
the whole idea of
educational disability,
again, of which
you could say more.
But there's an
interesting schism here.
I think that the organizational
principles were well modeled
on industrial production.
I'm not saying consciously,
but it was in the culture
that people thought that way.
I mean, how do you mobilize
vast numbers of people
through a system?
You standardize, select, make
it about conformity and so on.
But the intellectual
culture of education
wasn't based on
factory production.
It was based on the interests
of the universities.
And the universities
were interested in people
who were good at academic work.
And it was assumed that
in order to succeed
in professional jobs, you needed
good academic qualifications.
And I've always been
intrigued by that.
Because in ordinary life,
to describe something
as purely academic is to dismiss
it as theoretical and not
practical.
Academics are meant to
live in ivory towers
and not know how the
real world works.
I mean, it's not
true, by the way.
But that's part of mythology.
So along the way--
and there are deeper
roots to this culturally--
but along the way,
education also became
obsessed with academic
work, academic ability,
and a kind of caste
system evolved
which distinguished
between people
who are good at
academic work and those
who are more
practically oriented,
between academic and
vocational courses.
And so people who went
on to work in the trades
or to do manual work were
just implicitly considered
to be not smartest of people
who went to university,
and that persists
still, I think,
in our view of the world.
But there are really
two types of kid,
academic and non-academic.
Or as we've come to think
of them, or as a commonly
caricature, the able
and the less able.
And so these cultural
roots and economic roots
are really very deep-seated
in our current systems
of education.
And they're simply not
fit for purpose now,
which is why I think it's
not enough to improve them.
We have to replace them.
>>JAMES: I couldn't
tend to agree more.
And I think that it's
easy to see that that
was a good idea at the time.
It made sense.
It Was very fitting for that
particular period of time.
And yet as we've
progressed, we seem
to have stuck with this
idea, even though we
can see that it's not working.
One of the points
that you touched on
is this idea that
it just doesn't work
for certain types of people.
You called it an educational--
>>KEN: Caste system.
>>JAMES: Caste system.
And then certain people
that doesn't work for.
And we then classify them as
having a particular condition.
They are unable to
learn, they have ADHD,
or they have
something like this.
And is that not this
the symptom that's
sort of telling of
this particular system?
>>KEN: Well, it is
obviously more complicated
in practice than the
quick sketch I've given.
I mean, everything is when it
comes to it in human systems.
I mean, for example, many
people benefited enormously
from the opportunities
that were presented.
It was an absolute
paradigm shift
in the history of
our social systems
that so many people were put
through education systems
with a view to developing
their basic skills in literacy
and numeracy and
giving opportunities
to others to develop other
sorts of intellectual capacity
as well.
I mean, as I say, it
was unprecedented for
to happen on this scale, like
the Industrial Revolution
itself was unprecedented.
And some people really
benefited from it.
I'm one of them.
There's no doubt about that.
I mean, I grew up in a
large working-class family
in Liverpool.
And I wouldn't be sitting here
talking to you now had it not
been for the system of
mass public education.
And I'm not critical
of its intentions.
I'm not critical of the benefits
it bestowed on lots of people.
I'm very sensitive the
idea that some people like
me did very well,
and then they get
accused of trying to pull up
the ladder after themselves.
But that's not
really how it worked.
I mean, the system
was always designed
to benefit some people.
And I, like others, had
a kind of interest in it.
It suited me, in a way.
But it would have
been like having
a system of education that
was based entirely on the need
to produce more carpenters.
And it would benefit the people
who were good at carpentry
and want to become
carpenters, and it would have
disadvantaged everyone else.
They would have been considered
to be less able if they were
got electricity or if they
were good at writing essays,
they would have been put
in some remedial group.
If you take a narrow
conception of human competence
and then use it as a measure
of everybody, of course
some people will
benefit from it.
And it isn't just the
activities we're given.
It's the opportunities
that education creates.
And one of the reasons that
education is so important
is because it helps people to
expand their consciousness,
expand their minds, to
be able to understand
things they previously wouldn't
have had access to at all.
And so I'm not critical
of the intention.
And it was designed, I think,
with the best purpose in mind,
in many cases.
I mean, any political
system is also
shot through with cynicism.
We know that.
But it worked in some
ways for some people.
It was also a catastrophe
for a lot of other people.
I know this to be true.
I know, again, if I take
my own experience of it
that in the UK for
a period of time,
the selection after
elementary school
was to go to grammar schools
or secondary market schools.
Most public systems
have something like that
or have had something like that.
And the decision to send
you one way or the other
was based on your
performance in this test,
in our case, 11-plus,
which was an IQ test.
Well, IQ is a very
troubled idea.
A lot of people, I
think, came to believe
that IQ was like a
blood test, that you
answered these questions.
And if you scored above a
certain level, you were smart.
And if you didn't,
then you weren't.
And the fact is
that intelligence
is much more complicated
than the ability
to answer several pages of
questions at 11:00 o'clock
in the morning at the age of 11.
And a lot of people
who failed the test
could easily have
passed it if they'd
been given different support,
they'd been coached definitely,
they'd had a different
attitude to it.
It's a bit like a driving test.
If you put random
people in the car
and say, drive this
down the freeway,
some people are going to
crash, and some people
figure it out quite quickly.
But almost everybody
could get the hang of it
if you showed them
what was involved.
I passed 11-plus because of
a whole set of circumstances
that were peculiar to me.
And I had some great
teachers, some great coaches,
and I had an
advantage in doing it.
But I don't regret.
It opened up an entire
world of opportunity for me.
But the intentions
may be an honorable,
but it also meant that a lot
of people were discarded.
I know all kinds of people who
are tremendously able, smart,
competent, brilliant in
some cases, who did not pass
that test at the age of 11.
They still carry
with them the sense
that they're just not as
smart as they're making out,
that it's all a big fraud.
I mean, I mean the university
chancellors and heads
of companies that met along
the way who will sort of say
in a slightly shamefaced
way, but of course, I
failed 11-plus, but
I succeeded anyway.
And it's as if they've been
stamped at this very early age.
So I think it's important to
keep that perspective in mind,
that this was not an
absolute test of ability.
It was a
culturally-oriented test.
Similar tests, by
the way used to be
applied to people arriving
in America at Ellis island.
And people were
assigned in times of war
to certain countries
in the military based
on their performance
in an IQ test.
And the ability, of course,
to complete IQ tests
is often dependent
on cultural knowledge
and linguistic skills,
which people didn't have.
So you might get
very able people
come in who failed the test,
because they literally couldn't
understand what was going on.
So I think the whole history
of IQ is very troubled.
Our conception of
intelligence in the West
is very narrow,
for the most part.
It's confined still
to a particular form
of academic work.
And a lot of the work I've
been doing for long time
is based on the need to have
a richer conception of how
intelligence works,
what it is, how
varied it is among individuals.
How varied it is
within individuals,
how our capacities
are multifarious,
and they're as rich and diverse
as native culture itself.
And I think it's really very
important, because education
is one of the ways that we
give our children access
to themselves, and help
them to become who they are,
and who they can be.
And it comes at a very
crucial point in our lives.
And so I think we're playing
for very high stakes here.
>>JAMES: I would agree.
And I think that
the stakes are high,
and I think that when you said
that the children are very
easily conditioned at
that particular age,
we know that from
a lot of studies,
that a lot of the
subconscious conditioning
happens in children up to
the age of six or seven.
And they sort of download
a lot of their environment.
And I know people
that are fully grown
who are successful in
many ways but still bad--
and then there's people that
are less successful, culturally
speaking, and they still
battle these ideas.
Well, little Johnny was
told he wasn't ever going
to amount to anything, because
he wasn't good at math.
So he wasn't good at this.
And these sort of messages from,
sometimes teachers, sometimes
from a schooling environment,
people carry it with them.
And they believe that
maybe I'm not good enough.
Maybe I don't fit in.
There is quite a bit of
this lack of self-worth
that seems to be going around
with people who hit midlife,
and they're doing a job
that they don't really love.
And they find out, well, I've
been not really supported
that much, maybe,
in their upbringing.
>>KEN: Yes.
I mean, and I don't lay all
the problems of humanity
at the door of public education.
On the contrary.
I mean, I think it's been a
great force for liberation
and a great force for good.
And you know that
some people will
give in to feelings
of inadequacy
and a lack of
self-worth no matter
what the circumstance is.
They could be growing up in
the most privileged environment
possible with the greatest
support from their parents.
I think a lot of boomer
millennial parents
have discovered
this, that you lavish
every opportunity on your
children, you encourage them.
Particularly, it's been true
in the last number of years,
I think, where children are
being extolled and praised
for every single thing
like opening the door
and walking through it and
being able to drink from a cup.
And there isn't a straight line
between affirmation and praise
and a sense of self-worth.
I mean, very often I think
it downgrades the currency.
And people, kids discover
things come too easy for them,
and the bar shifts.
So it's never straightforward.
It's like recommending
one sort of food that
will solve your health
problems, and it turns out
it's not like that.
It's about how it all
fits into the overall diet
and balance of your life.
And so it wouldn't
be right to say--
I mean, I'm certainly
not saying--
that all the
feelings that people
have of inadequacy
and self-doubt
are because of how
they've been educated.
Sometimes, in some
cases, it certainly is.
And what's also certainly
true is that education
can be part of the problem.
Sometimes, a big part of it.
And I think it's important to
recognize that education won't
solve all social problems,
but it's very important
that it's part of
the solution to them,
and that it doesn't
pile on difficulties.
I mean, I do know
from firsthand people
who were devastated by their
education and others who've
been liberated by it.
And it's one of
the reasons why I
think it's very important
that we move away
from some idea of
standardization and conformity
and recognize that individual
achievement, individual values,
individual potential lives are
as various as the people were
talking about.
Education has to
become individualized.
And if you
standardize it, you're
bound to create a catastrophe
for some people that
would be avoidable if you
saw them as individuals.
>>JAMES: Mm.
Mm.
We've recently adopted
a boy into our family.
He's older.
It's an interesting story.
I won't go into it
here, obviously.
And he's going to school, and
his schooling was very basic
when he was growing up.
And sometimes, he
wouldn't go to school.
It was just his environment.
And now, he's fitting into
his new school environment,
and he's having to sort
of up-level a little bit
from an academic perspective.
But socially, he's
very skillful.
In the sports field,
he's very skillful,
and it's interesting that
he's being acknowledged
for those things as well in
this school, which is fantastic.
There is an epic story I believe
you told of this one lady who
thankfully had somebody help
to identify that she was
a dancer and not somebody
that was to be sort of forced
down this particular pathway.
And she went on to do great
things with Andrew Lloyd
Webber, et cetera.
>>KEN: Yeah.
I remember telling this
at the TED Talk I gave.
It's a wonderful woman
who died recently, sadly,
but at a great age.
She was in her mid-90s.
But her name was Gillian Lynne.
And I got to know
her fairly well when
I was working with the Royal
Ballet a long time ago.
But Gillian, when she was a
young kid in elementary school,
was in constant trouble.
It turned out because
she didn't pay attention.
She fidgeted a great
deal and tended
to get up and wander around.
And eventually, the school
contacted her mother
and said that they thought
Gillian had a learning
difficulty.
And her mother was naturally
devastated to hear that.
This is the 1930s, by the way.
And she went to see the school,
and they explained to her
what she thought she
should do, and that she
should take Gillian to see
a specialist, some advice.
I guess it was a psychologist.
And Gillian said
she remembers going
into the room with her mother.
Her mother dressed her
in her Sunday clothes
and put out her best shoes
on and tied to her back
and so she would look
very presentable.
And she said she remembers going
into this room, an oak panel
room with leather-bound
books everywhere,
and this large desk, and this
man in a three-piece tweed suit
and sitting down with him.
And then he has to go and sit
in the far end of the room
on this leather sofa.
And he talked to her moth
about all the problems
Gillian was having and now
started to describe them.
And she said all this time that
her mother was speaking to him,
he was staring at Gillian.
And she said, I
was uncomfortable,
and I was sitting on my
hands so I wouldn't fidget.
And so now, this went
on for several minutes.
And then he stood up and
he said to Gillian, look.
This has been very
interesting, Gillian,
but I need to speak to
your mother privately now.
So if you wait here,
we're going to leave you,
but we'll be back.
We won't be very far away.
We'll come back
in a few minutes.
And she said they got
up and they went out.
But as they went out, he
leaned across his desk
and turned the radio on.
And they got into
the car, apparently,
and he turned to her mother
and said, just stand here
for a moment, Mrs.
Lynne, and watch her.
See what she does.
See said there was a
window back into the room
so that she couldn't see
them, but they could see her.
And she said the minute
they were out of the room,
she was on their feet,
moving to the music.
So she danced around on top
of the sofa, on the tables.
And she said because she'd
been sitting still for so long.
And apparently they watch
this for a couple of minutes.
And he turned to her mother.
And he said, Mrs. Lynne,
Jillian isn't sick.
She's a dancer.
Take her to a dance school.
And I said, what happened?
She said, well, she did.
And we went to the
Royal Ballet School.
And she said, I walked
into this room and said,
I'll never forget it.
It was full of people like me,
people who couldn't sit still.
And as she put it, "people
had to move to think."
And she said she did the full
program at the ballet school.
She was eventually accepted
into the Royal Ballet.
She joined the corps
de ballet, and then
she became a soloist, a
principal and soloist,
and had a wonderful career
at the Royal Ballet,
traveled the world with them.
And then, when she left,
she formed our own company,
the Gillian Lynne Dance Company.
Put all kinds of productions on
in Broadway and the West End.
Then she met Andrew Lloyd
Webber as an accomplished
and very successful dancer and
choreographer at this point.
And Andrew asked
her if she would
choreograph "Cats,"
which she did,
and "Phantom of the Opera."
And other of his
productions, she
became his principal
choreographer.
And as I said, she went on
to give pleasure to millions
and became a multi-millionaire.
And it's perfectly possible
these days that somebody else
would tell her to sit down, calm
down, and take these tablets.
And she wasn't sick.
She was a dancer.
And I feel this for an
awful lot of people,
that if you stereotype people
against a very narrow view
of ability, then
you automatically
generate a very big conception
of inability and, at worst,
a disability.
And I don't know
this from firsthand.
I mean, was in
special ed as a kid.
I wrote about this a while back.
I got polio when I was four.
As I said, I was from a
big working-class family
in Liverpool.
And in the 1950s, there was
an epidemic that swept right
across Europe and America.
And anyway, I got it.
But until the age of four,
my father particularly
was convinced I was
going to be the soccer
player in the family, because
we were right next door
to Everton's football ground.
In fact, my brother Neil
went on to play for them
as a professional player.
And anyway, this disease was
ripping through the place,
and I got it.
And the upshot was that
when I came out of hospital,
I was on two calipers,
had crutches, and was
in a wheelchair,
and was, as I've
said in the past,
tremendously acute.
I was like a money machine.
People just spontaneously
gave me cash in the street.
It was fantastic.
I've often thought I might
return to that, really,
if all else fails, but--
>>JAMES: I don't think
it's as effective in LA.
You're still cute, Ken.
Trust me.
[LAUGHTER]
>>KEN: But I went
into special ed
when I came out of the hospital.
I was five, and I'm surrounded
by people with all kinds
of physical difficulties.
There were lot of
kids with polio,
there were kids
with hydrocephalus,
kids with cerebral palsy,
partially sighted, blind-deaf.
And I always hesitate to draw
any kind of straight line.
I'm not doing now what
I do because of that.
But there's no doubt that
having had that experience
informs how I think about things
now and has done for a while.
Because it would be
odd not to draw from
experiences to contextualize
it a little more.
And I felt that at the
time, we were in that school
because we all had some
form of physical disability.
But it didn't interest
any of us as kids.
We weren't going
around, assessing
other people's disabilities and
trying to find out about them.
We were just kids hanging
out, like kids do.
And you formed
friendships if you
found somebody interesting,
or funny, or attractive,
as you do as a kid.
Even if you're five, you
have crushes on other kids,
and it's just another society.
And for us, that wasn't the
distinguishing characteristic,
nor was it, in our view, the
most interesting about us.
And I've always kind of clung
to that, that a lot of the kids
there were thought to
have learning difficulties
whether they did or
they didn't in virtue
of the physical
disability they had.
So if you have, as
some kids do, if they
had cerebral palsy or a symptom
associated with cerebral palsy,
they might find it very
difficult to speak.
Well, in a culture where
we associate intelligence
with clarity of speech,
the automatic assumption
is that there was something
wrong with their mind
as well, with their
intellectual capacities, which
then may or may not have been.
I used to find that when
I was getting on buses
or going in public--
I still occasionally get it.
If I get on public
transport, people
will speak a little louder to
me or with some slightly more
exaggerated pronunciation
to make sure I
am getting what they're saying.
And you just got amused by it.
But you know that there are
these sort of cultural--
or people try even harder
than normal to act naturally.
And if you're in a wheelchair,
you get that a lot.
I mean, I travel a lot.
And in the last few years I've
given in to family pressure.
So I've had a complete
180 about this.
I used to walk around airports.
I went everywhere on my
own, and just get older,
and things just get
harder to get around, so.
But since I was in a
wheelchair as a kid,
I was in no rush to
get back into one.
It was a big liberation
for me to get out
of It so I used to have
people say, why don't you get
a wheelchair at the airport?
And I said, I can't really
quite explain this to you,
but I don't want to.
Because I know I'll end up
back in one at some point,
but not yet.
So I used to walk
around these airports.
And people would come at me and
say, do you want a wheelchair?
And I'd shout at
them in my mind.
I mean, I was polite and British
about the whole situation,
obviously.
But I know I don't
want a wheelchair.
Now, I've done a complete 180
since I've started taking them,
and I get irritated when my
wheelchair is not waiting
when I come off the plane.
Like, where the hell is it?
But if you're in the
wheelchair, if I'm
with one of the
people I work with,
or traveling with my wife,
or my son, or my daughter,
you get to check-in,
and people will
talk to the person pushing
the wheelchair, not to me.
Yeah.
And they will say things like,
does he have a boarding pass?
And I'll go, actually,
you can ask me.
Now, I say that
not because I think
that that's an
unusual experience,
but because it's not.
On the whole, if people
have some visible physical
difficulty, it sets off a
chain of reactions with people.
And it's true.
It's true about
race and ethnicity.
People who don't have a lot
of friends from other cultures
start acting over-naturally
in their company.
It seems to me very
often they overcompensate
to show I'm fine with this.
I'm cool with this.
And it's no more than
to say that people
have a difficulty
with difference,
and sometimes, they
get blinded by it.
So I know that a lot of
kids I was at school with
and a lot of kids
I've seen subsequently
in special education may
have wonderful abilities
in all sorts of
other areas which
are obscured in the eyes of the
beholder by their preoccupation
with a particular disability
that may or may not
be the problem the
person is dealing with.
And it's more than that, really.
I mean, I've said it recently.
I've never yet come across
anybody, truthfully,
anybody anywhere who
doesn't have special needs.
We all have them, everyone.
It's the nature of it.
They may be imagined.
People may have some
worry about the shape
and size of their nose.
It might be their
top preoccupation.
I think the whole world is
upset about their earlobes
or whatever it is.
Whatever it is, it's something.
And that's all in the nature
of the human condition
that people are insecure in
some areas about themselves.
It's about how they come across
that they're insecure socially.
So you can't properly, I
think, consider something
as human, personal, and
consequential as education
without understanding that, and
without taking account of it,
and knowing that all education
is about relationships.
It's about connections that
you make or fail to make.
And that if you make a proper
connection with somebody,
and if you see them
for who they are,
you can literally transform the
whole course of their lives,
and great teachers do that.
It's certainly true
of my life and it's
true for most people's
lives that I know.
>>JAMES: Mm.
Beautiful.
When you talk about
some of the concepts
that you have for,
say, broadening
our educational scope, some
of the concepts you talk about
are encouraging more creativity.
That's the cornerstone
of a lot of your work.
And you talk in terms of
not just that it's creative,
but that it encourages children
to have a go, to make mistakes,
to step out.
And that is such a
critically important skill.
I've been aware on this as an
entrepreneur and making films.
You're constantly
making mistakes.
You're always learning,
always growing.
Why is it important for kids to
be encouraged to be creative?
>>KEN: Well, creativity is one
of the defining characteristics
of our species.
It's one of the things
that makes us human
and that identifies us as human.
And there are others
which are connected.
But if we're concerned
with helping people
realize who they are--
I mean, realize in both
senses, understand who they are
and bring that about and
to become the fullest
version of themselves--
then it pays us to
think, well, what
are these things that are
characteristic of our humanity?
In most respects, we are like
the rest of life on Earth.
And it's interesting that
in particular the past 300
years, so many people seem
to have forgotten that.
I was listening
recently to an interview
with Toni Morrison,
who died recently,
the Nobel novelist,
Nobel writer.
And she was making
a very simple point,
but it's a very important point.
She was asked
about her portrayal
of animals in her novels and how
intimately she describes them.
And she was saying that
when she was growing up--
and it's certainly true
for my parents' generation
and definitely of my
grandparents' generation,
even though we grew
up in the city,
and certainly true for the
vast majority of people
in the pre-industrial period.
Animals weren't incidental
to people's lives.
They were intimately
connected with our lives
not as pets, but as part of
the ecosystem in which they
lived and depended.
Farmers had cattle and sheep.
And not only that,
other animals which
they knew by name,
which were part of--
and they still are, of course,
in rural parts of the world.
And we had an intimate
relationship as a--
we didn't until the
industrial period.
We had an intimate relationship
with the natural world
in every respect.
People understood the
pattern of seasons.
They understood the pattern
of weather formationd.
They understood, intuitively,
the different characteristics
and personalities almost of
animals they worked with,
depended upon, lived from.
They were an intimate
part of the human economy,
as they still are, in a sense
in some parts of the world.
But in recent years with
the growth of industrialism
and consumerism and the
systems of mass food production
and consumption, we've
become distanced from them.
And now, our
relationship with animals
is reduced to, often, this
rather exaggerated sense
of affection for
individual pets.
And many are people who have
become tremendously sentimental
about pets, household
pets, will nonetheless
sit by and watch the mass
slaughter of animals for food
that eat burgers at the
table and feed bits of them
to their pets with a kind
of dewy-eyed sentiment
and not recognize the
carnage that's being wrought
on the planet as a consequence.
So Toni Morrison's
point was that we
used to have this very intimate
relationship with animals
in our ecosystem.
And part of my point
is in most respects,
we are just like the
rest of life on Earth.
Most of the
creatures, the mammals
especially and
what we think of as
the higher-order
animals, ones like us.
I mean, not ones that live
in shells all the time.
We know they have
feelings, sensibilities.
They have affections,
they mourn, they grieve.
They exalt, they raise children.
The fact they're a
different form of life
doesn't mean they're
separate from us
or that we should despise them.
We may know this to be true.
But there are some
respects-- and a big part
of what I'm arguing for
is that we should restore
those connections, or at least
restore our sense of compassion
for the rest of life on
Earth rather than wreak havoc
against it that we're doing.
But there are
clearly some respects
in which we are different.
And it would be
silly to deny them.
And in fact, on the contrary, it
behooves us to understand them
and to cultivate them.
For example, we
are sitting here,
surrounded by
advanced technology.
But I'm not being
interviewed by a llama.
It isn't that there are other
creatures outside holding
conferences and got their
own version of the iPad.
There are some things
that human beings
are capable of that no other
species has showed itself,
at least so far as we know.
And among them is that, I
mean, well, for example,
my wife and I have recently
become grandparents.
And we have a granddaughter
now who is 16 months.
And I mean, we're very pleased,
because we feel very blessed
by this, because
it turns out she's
the most beautiful, gifted
child ever to be born.
So we're feeling a bit
privileged by that.
I feel sorry for all
these other grandparents
who are dealing with these
second-order kids, so.
But we look at our grandchild
and you look at any baby.
Think of your own children
when they're born.
Think of yourself
when you were born.
As human beings, we have
boundless capacities.
We're capable of the most
extraordinary things.
Most other creatures, so far as
we can tell, live in the world
pretty much as they find it.
They adapt to the
world around them.
They are evolved to live
in the environment they
find themselves in.
They only function in
certain sorts of environment.
You move them out of
those environments,
they don't function
very well at all,
which is why we're facing
the next big extinction,
because we're
diligently destroying
the environment that all these
other creatures depend upon.
They can't decide.
Well, look.
I think what we'll do
is we'll move to Sydney
and see how things
work out there.
That doesn't work.
Whereas, we adapt
to our environments,
and we also change them
and construct environments.
And among the reasons
are that as human beings,
we have an entirely
different order
of intellectual and
emotional capacities.
Probably the most
obvious one to mention
is we have an extraordinary
capacity for speech.
I mean, here we are using it.
Children aren't born speaking.
They don't come out of the
womb saying, that was close.
I don't want to go through
that again in a rush.
That doesn't happen.
They sit, then they
burble, and they babble.
And that goes on
for about 18 months,
and they start to form
words here and there.
But most kids in
ordinary circumstances,
by the time they're
two or three,
have got the hang of speech.
And you can see they're
straining to get it as well.
But nobody teaches
them how to do it.
As a parent, you don't sit
your child down and say,
look, we need to talk, and tell
them how it's going to work.
They figure it out, and they
do it because they want to
and they can.
I know people--
I was talking to
somebody last night,
for example, who speaks seven
languages comfortably, not
because she's
linguistically gifted,
but because that's
how her life fell out
over the course of
the first 20 years.
And we're all capable of
learning multiple languages.
No other creature is.
Not language as we know
it, not sophisticated,
interactive language that convey
a host of innumerable meanings.
Kids learn quite
quickly the noises
we make aren't meaningless.
They refer to things.
And it's not just
words that do that.
Images do it.
Musical sounds do it.
We live in a world
invested with meaning.
And as the great Clifford
Geertz once said,
a cultural anthropologist,
"As human beings,
we are suspended in
webs of significance
that we ourselves have spun."
We don't see the world
directly as we grow.
We learn to speak well
and not only to speak
but we learn other
cultural systems.
We learn mathematics.
We learn behavioral codes.
We learn what's OK
to do round here.
We learn values, belief systems.
We learn about food.
We learn how to dress
ourselves, all these things.
And then if we have access to
education in the right way,
we learn that the world
exists before we got here,
that there's a history to it.
There have been thousands of
generations before we got here.
With luck, there'll
be thousands more.
That we live in a
huge, unending cosmos.
And our minds and
conscious become expanded,
and we start to learn
the skills to move around
and to connect
with other people.
All of that is available
to us when we're born,
but it's not in us
when we're born.
We have to cultivate that.
And I feel that human
resources, to use the term,
are just like the world's
natural resources.
They are highly diverse.
We all have multiple
talents, many of which
we never discover.
We'll all go to our
graves unaware of things
that we might have been able to
do had the opportunity come up.
I often think about this.
In the Pacific,
there are kids who
go diving for pearls who
can hold their breath
underwater in minutes on end.
Any kid living in Los Angeles
could learn to do that,
that they would
have the capacity.
It's just that pearl diving
isn't a big calling round here.
It's just not something--
Any kid in the
17th century could
have learned to rap or to
play the electric guitar,
but there wasn't a call for it.
So we have these
extraordinary capacities.
What becomes them depends
on opportunity, disposition,
and circumstance, a big
part of which is education.
And in a very literal
sense, creativity
is how we compose our lives.
Among these capacities, the root
of it, I think, is imagination.
Imagination is a power we
completely take for granted,
for it's the capacity to bring
to mind things that aren't
present, to
anticipate the future,
to anticipate possible
futures, to revisit the past,
to try and see things from
other people's points of view.
We can compose in
our minds things
that are entirely improbable.
They are imaginary.
We can come up with
ideas for things
that weren't around before.
We can be imaginative.
There are all sorts of ways
in which we use this capacity.
Creativity is the
executive wing imagination.
It's putting your
imagination to work.
And so we learn to
speak, but then we
start to compose
novel sentences.
And the best example,
I think, of creative it
is our own lives.
We all compose our own lives.
As far as we know, there have
been somewhere around 100
billion human beings
like us who've
drawn breath and lived on this
Earth over the past 200,000
years.
I don't mean
prehistoric creatures.
I mean groovy people
like you and me,
people with our sensibilities
and our capacities,
about 100 billion of us.
And every single life has
been different, unrepeatable,
unique.
Every biography is original
to the person who's living it.
And you know, we all do,
that we create the lives
that we live through
the possibilities we see
and the opportunities we take,
or the ones we step away from.
Well, I wrote the
book a few years back
called "The Element--
How Finding Your Passion
Changes Everything."
It's how people's
lives are transformed
by discovering a talent and
the passion and purpose that
goes with it.
That's what the Gillian
Lynne story's about.
And creativity, in other words,
isn't some exotic byproduct
that happens to be
present in a few people.
We've come to think of it
that way, but it's not true.
Creativity is the
pulse of human life.
We live in a city that wasn't
here 150 years ago like this.
This has been created
by the interplay
of millions of minds working
together, collaborating.
Where all of us now are based in
the great net of the World Wide
Web and all of its works,
this is new to our generation.
This didn't happen before.
It didn't come into being.
It didn't come around
like the oceans.
We made this.
Somebody designed the
clothes that we wear.
Creativity is what contributes
to the nature of our humanity.
We can use it and
we can misuse it.
So to me, I'm saying that
education should cultivate
children's creative capacities
isn't kind of an appeal
to have some extra hour of
free-play-based activities
on a Friday afternoon,
though I think
we should have free-play-based
activities on a Friday
afternoon.
It's to recognize that there
is a set of capacities here
which isn't separate
from, but it's
integrated with everything
else that we do.
But it is both the gift
and the peril of humanity,
because all the crises that
we currently face on Earth
are the product of our various
preoccupations, culture
and otherwise.
We have created these
crises, and we're
going to have to get even more
creative working to solve them.
We've created the
food crisis, and we've
created the economic crisis.
We've created the
climate crisis.
And if we were to
solve them, we have
to get even more
creative, not less.
But what's true of our behavior
as a species is true for us
as individuals.
So it's not incidental.
It's why I'm so
interested in it.
It's not because I think
it's a footnote to humanity.
It's the main text.
>>JAMES: Interesting.
It's fascinating how
you weave together
this concept of creativity
and also manifestation
of visualization,
this concept to think
about other alternative futures,
to visualize an outcome.
And that's a skill
that sometimes people
are not taught or learn until
much later in life, when
they're doing their
own, say, personal--
it's called personal
development now.
It seems like in a lot of
personal development work,
learning about
these creative ideas
about manifesting
your life or creating
things are things
that people go through
during a midlife crisis.
And they're not really taught.
>>KEN: I think part of this
is that when we learn to speak
and when we learn languages--
not just being able to write
and to read and so on--
when we become
participants in a culture,
as we all do eventually,
we don't just
learn to convey ideas.
We're learning ways
of having them.
We use concepts
that are embedded
in the language or
relationships that
are embedded in the language.
I always find it
interesting to ask people
who speak several languages
if they think differently
in these languages, and they do.
They do.
They think definitely
about things.
They think about
different things.
And they often will flip
from one language to the next
to say something, which isn't
as easy in the language they
were speaking at the time.
And embedded in our language
for all kinds of categories.
And it's an interesting
feature to me
that the things that we're
using language describe
are different from the words
we're using to describe them.
We're approximating.
There's a wonderful
philosopher who
I think is too neglected
now, but her name
was Susanne Langer, an
American philosopher.
She was a student
of Ann Whitehead
and published a lot
in the '40s and '50s.
She wrote a book called
"Philosophy in a New Key,"
and it's about how language
provides not just language,
but our capacity for
representational thought.
It provides templates to which
we organize our experience.
I mean, it's a subtle
and dynamic process.
We know that.
But she says, for example--
she talks about the
difference between language
and visual art.
So when we're speaking, we're
using a systematic process
of representation.
I mean, I think of this as
systemic and schematic symbols.
But what she was saying,
and she's not alone
to have said this, is that
when we're using words,
words have particular meanings.
They're not confined
to them, because words
have all kinds of resonances.
Obviously, all sorts
of shades, and nuances,
and reverberations.
But at the heart of it,
words mean this and not that.
And some word
means other things.
And you can tell, if you
come across in your words,
you can look it up
in a dictionary.
And it says, this
is what this means.
And it can mean something
more if a poet's using it
in a particular setting.
But it's a systematic
symbolism, and some things
mean things in certain
sequences and not in others.
There was a lovely book
published a number of years
ago that became a bit of
a sensation in the UK.
It's called "Eats,
Shoots, and Leaves."
And it was all about the kind of
fabled debate about the Oxford
comma, whether you need the
comma in there or you don't.
But it there's a comma in
there after the shoots, then
the whole sentence starts
to mean something else.
"Eats, Shoots, and Leaves."
Well, they'd probably
describe that
as something that
happened in the bar
or in a restaurant where there
was some violent altercation.
But if it's just "Eat,
Shoots and Leaves,"
you're probably describing
the dietary habits of one
of the larger primates.
So but you know that this is
a systematic symbolism that
has encoded meanings
that mean certain things,
and it's unlikely they
would mean something else.
And the whole point
about speech is you're
trying to be precise about it.
But as Susanne Langer says,
and others have said it, too,
some ideas go perfectly well
into words and some don't.
There are some things
you can't really
put into words quite so easily.
Poets can try it, but it's
not a literal meaning.
We turn to metaphors and
analogies to capture this.
And so she said, so putting
some ideas into words
is a bit like seeing
clothes on a washing line.
You string them up,
but the experience
is of wearing them all wrapped
up inside of each other.
That's not the experience.
That's a way of thinking
about the experience.
But if you look at a painting,
all the information's
there right now.
Where as if you're
listening to a sentence,
you have to hear
where it's going to.
It's time based, like music.
It's a time-based symbolism.
Where a painting is all or not.
There's no more information
in the painting than what
you can see right now.
This contextual information,
you learn about it.
But the paintings
right there right now.
But that's another
example of how
we try to render our
experience intelligible
through representation.
And part of the way we
tend to think in English--
and it's true of a lot of the
traditions of Western thought--
is to therefore make
distinctions between things.
It's this, its not that.
It's how dictionaries work.
It means this, not that.
And a lot of the work
in academic philosophy,
a lot of work and academic
activities in general,
is based on a certain
type of reasoning,
a logical, deductive reasoning,
making clear distinctions.
It's this, it's not that.
This is how this
differs from that.
It's like the great adventures
in the encyclopedic movement
that began in Europe
which led to an attempt
to classify all human knowledge.
And it led to taxonomic
systems in natural history.
So we developed the idea of
different genera, and species,
and subspecies.
So now, if you go to the
natural history museum in any
of our great cities-- and I was
in one in London a little while
ago--
you walk through all these
different halls, and pavilions,
and exhibitions.
And you see all these
different species all laid out.
I was writing about
it a while ago.
So you can go into one.
There's a roomful
of butterflies,
and they're all in
cases, organized
by species, subspecies.
And they're arranged
beautifully in these cases.
Large ones at the top,
small ones at the bottom,
pinned, dead.
And you go to the next room.
And there were beetles,
arachnids, all organized
species by species, dead.
And it's an interesting
way to understand
the nature of species
and different genera
from a biological point of view.
It's a good way to
study it, but it's not
how it is when you walk out
of the natural history museum.
If you go to the
countryside, you
don't see rows of
flying butterflies
kept in strict military
sequence with the large ones
at the front, the
small ones at the back,
and all the spiders
walking around over there,
keeping their distance
and keeping themselves
to themselves.
In nature, everything's
wrapped up in itself.
And it's similar
to me in the way
we begin to discuss
human affairs,
that we have to
distinguish things
about to talk about them.
But we have to be
careful where we
make that where we put the
dotted and the unbroken lines.
So, for example, people
talk about is creativity
as important as academic work?
It's a totally
false distinction.
Some of the most
creative people I know
are writing academic treatises.
Science has an academic
component to it.
That's to say, academic
work is about a certain type
of logical deductive
reasoning and propositional
knowledge for the most part,
and knowledge of something
is the case.
But knowledge takes
many forms, as you know.
I mean, we talked about
something being the case.
We can know that
something is true,
or we can contend that
that this is a factual--
like Elizabeth II is
the queen of England.
That's a proposition.
We take it to be true,
we can verify it.
And we can go call
her up and say,
is that what's still going on?
We agree that's the situation.
And a lot of education is
full of proposition knowledge,
historical knowledge,
scientific knowledge,
and other forms of knowledge.
Artistic, cultural knowledge.
But there's a whole
other area of work
which is not knowing that.
It's knowing how.
How do you make this work?
How do you put this together?
I know this painting is by van
Gogh, but how did he do that?
How could-- how
would you do that?
We know you're making a film.
How do you do this?
So the application of ideas
and the dialogue between theory
and practice is intimate in the
growth of human civilizations.
Education.
For the most part,
has become focus
on the theoretical
aspects, knowing that.
That's what academic
work tends to do.
It works more at the theoretical
level than the practical level,
despite the fact the world
is a very practical place,
and we need to put
ideas into practice,
and see the feedback loop.
There's also another way of
knowing, which is knowing this,
knowing what's happened
now between you me.
Knowing what happens when you
hold your child, knowing what
happens when you're
feeling hungry.
Knowing what happens when you
lose somebody that you love,
the nature of human experience.
And that's not dealt with
by the academic world.
In fact, on the contrary.
One of the false
distinctions that's
made very often in education
is between knowing and feeling,
when they're
intimately connected.
This is like the
butterfly on the wall.
I think we know things
because we feel them.
And we feel certain
things because
of what we know about them.
So when we start to
talk about creativity,
is it important as
well as academic work?
And I want to unscramble
the whole equation.
So what we've now found
ourselves in a situation
where kids in school
are being forced
to do all kinds of dreary
work which teachers
don't want to do either.
They're preparing
themselves for tests.
These tests are consequential,
foolishly and unnecessarily.
They're creating all
kinds of stress in kids.
They're creating
problems of retention.
The kids are being
medicated as a consequence.
We're being told
there, the problem,
that they have a learning
disorder when actually, what
they're being asked to
learn is itself inherently
tedious and stressful.
And suddenly, I find recently,
people have started to say,
I think what we really now
ought to be paying attention to
are children's social and
emotional development.
So we're having
programs on a Thursday
afternoon in social and
emotional development.
And all these things are--
many of these things--
are the consequence
of false conceptions about how
people work, how they connect.
And if you remove
those sorts of ideas--
people have social
and emotional problems
if they don't connect with each
other or if they're kept apart.
It's like social
media at the moment.
I think it's a total misnomer.
These are not social media.
These are, for the most
part, anti-social media.
They're not helping
people connect.
They're disabling
people's capacity
to connect on a personal level.
So it's one of the
reasons I say I think
we need to rethink education,
because trying to improve it
based on misconceptions of how
a human mind, a human organism
operates, how we are in
the world, how we relate
to each other, how we
relate to the planet
is part of the problem.
And unless we get
to the root of that
and start to think in a more
integrated, more holistic, more
humanistic way about our
place in the order of things,
then we'll simply continue
refining a system that's
run its course and has created
all the problems that we now
scratch our heads about.
>>JAMES: Mm.
Interesting analogy
around the language.
I can empathize
with that deeply.
My wife speaks five languages.
I speak half-English, really.
It's not really the
Queen's English.
>>KEN: I noticed that.
>>JAMES: [LAUGHS] And I
learned Dutch recently,
which is the most useless
language to learn,
because they all
speak perfect English.
My wife's Dutch.
And I thought, look,
I've heard it enough.
I'll learn it.
And I learned it,
and I realized I'm
a completely different
person when I'm Dutch.
>>KEN: Is that right?
>>JAMES: I talk about
different things.
I joke about different things.
People talk to me
about different things.
I join conversations
in a unique way.
I make remarks about other
things that I would in English,
and it's a fascinating concept.
And then we compartmentalize
our whole experience of life
based on our language.
And languages have
different set--
because my wife will
switch from Dutch,
to German, to English,
then to fluent French,
and she changes
when she does that.
>>KEN: You see it too?
>>JAMES: Yes.
She's much more emotive,
much more in her heart
when she's speaking French.
And when it's German
and English, it's here.
It's like, very precise.
It's like she's a lawyer.
And that's a
fascinating concept.
>>KEN: It really is.
Terry and I were talking a
while ago with a young guy.
He was driving a car for us.
And he's American.
We're in Hawaii, and
telling us about his life.
He's a surfer.
And then, Terry, my
wife, she speaks French.
And she started to
speak to me in French,
and he picked up on that.
And it turned out his
mother was French,
and he was educated in
France as well as in America.
So he switched to French.
He was in the front of the car.
But he not only switched to
French, he became French.
He went from being
a surfing dude,
this kind of groovy, kind
of swept back here in Hawaii
to lounging around, [LAUGHS]
driving with one hand
and being chic.
It was just very just like that.
Yeah.
It's not just the language.
It's the whole sensibility
that goes with it.
And yeah, it's very interesting.
Isn't it?
>>JAMES: There's
this idea you have
about diversity
versus conformity,
and that in order
to succeed, we must
conform by all means possible.
And anyone who really
breaks away from that
is going to struggle.
And that's conditioned, in
many ways, by our parents.
I mean, my father
was an accountant.
He's like, go to school,
go to university.
Get a good job.
And once you have a good
job and a steady paycheck,
then good luck.
Off you go.
And I love playing music.
I love playing in a band.
My dad would say, well--
he wouldn't say it, but
you knew what he meant
when he looked at you that way.
You can't be a musician.
That's not possible.
All the musicians, all
artists are starving.
Go get a good job.
And so there's
this subtle mantra
that's sort of beaten into us
either with verbal language
or not.
So conformity is important.
Then you have the whole
mid-life crisis situation where
people are like, oh my god.
I've been a lawyer
my whole life,
but I didn't want
to be a lawyer.
I just hate that.
I grew up in a Jewish family.
My parents said you're going
to be a doctor or a lawyer.
I ended up a lawyer.
One of the dangers of
repeating this mantra,
and how can we sort
of maybe be more
proactive in our communication
with our children,
or young adults,
or in our society
to open up more possibilities?
Because there's YouTube
stars earning 10 times,
what, even the
most active person
can earn following a good path.
>>KEN: Well, diversity is
the hallmark of human life,
whereas diverse is
the natural world.
We know that.
Individually, it's an admixture
of talent, disposition,
personality, passions,
and interests.
I mean, by passion, I
don't mean going around
with a rose clamped between
your teeth and sweating
all the time.
I mean, but knowing that we're
all drawn to different things,
that we all love to
do sorts of things.
I know people in all kinds of
occupations who live for it.
This book I did, "The
Element," was about that.
To be in your
element is not only
about doing things you're
good at, but it is that.
It's funny, things that
you're naturally good at.
If you start it
from a point of view
with a narrow
conception of ability,
then you automatically
cut people off
from all sorts of other
diverse talents and interests
they could have.
It's why I rail against the
academic bias of education
not because I'm
against academic work.
On the contrary.
I was a university professor.
I did a PhD.
I like it.
I write books, but it's
not like I'm against it.
But it's not for everybody.
It would be like a
soccer player saying,
nobody should play
any game but soccer.
We should ban tennis.
We should revile people who
are into playing baseball.
I mean, it would be
a ridiculous thing.
It's just that it's a
very, very important set
of cultural and personal skills.
And some people have it
in different degrees.
And the fact that
somebody may not
be interested or be especially
good at conventional academic
work doesn't mean that's the
end of the story in terms
of their talent and interest.
And it doesn't mean that's
the end of their value
or that somehow, they're
second-rate because of it.
On the contrary.
So a lot of this is
about liberating our
set our conception of ability.
And being in "The
Element," I wrote that book
because it's clear that people
have all kinds of talents
and that there you have
great personal and social and
cultural value, too, and we
should be cultivating them.
But being good at
something isn't enough.
There are all kinds of people
who do things they're good at,
but they don't
really care for it.
And that's true in the sciences,
and the arts, and all the rest.
I mean, I was very funny
once with a book editor
who had previously been a
concert pianist who gave it up
because she didn't like it.
She was doing it because
she had to be good at it.
And nobody had stopped to ask
her whether she wanted to do it
or not.
And she really wanted
to be a book editor.
She loved the world of books,
and so she changed track
at that point.
Now, to be in your
element, you have
to not only be good at
something, you have to love it.
And if you love
something, then you'll
never work again, as they say.
And that's important
to me, because when
we talk about fulfillment
of an individual,
there's an important
difference, isn't there,
between physical energy
and spiritual energy?
I don't mean spiritual
in the religious sense.
I don't not.
But I mean that sense of mature
in high spirits or low spirits.
And you can see the difference.
If you do something
that you love to do,
you can be physically
exhausted by it but buzzing.
You see people who run marathons
or they play sports games.
They're whacked
at the end of it,
but they're exhilarated
by what they've done.
If you do something
you don't care for,
you can be physically fine,
but on the ground spiritually.
I know when I was working
at the universities,
Terry always knew what I'd
been doing during the day.
I could tell with
her, too by the way.
But I'd come through the door.
And if I'd had a day of
meetings, and boards,
and paperwork, I aged
about 20 years, she said.
I'd be heading straight
to the drinks cabinet.
I had a spiritual
crisis in that sense.
But after I've been working with
students or hanging with people
and running workshops
or projects,
I was kind of ready to
party when I came in.
And it's true for all of us.
If you do something
that you love to do,
it gives you energy.
That's one of the critical
ways you can tell.
You look at other
people doing work.
I see politicians
flying around the world.
And I think, how do
they stay upright?
But the fact is they
get energy from it.
And if you do something you
love, it gives you energy.
It doesn't take it from you.
It feeds you.
It keeps charging
your batteries.
And it's true of any
type of activity.
There are people who would--
the thing that you love, other
people hate it and vise versa.
There's no question about it.
You think, how do you do that?
I know people who look
at teachers and think,
I don't know how you would
get to work in the morning.
How do you motivate yourself?
And teachers who live
for what they do.
And not only teaching,
but certain age groups.
There are some people who live
for working with kindergarten
and grown men and
women who would
run a mile in the
opposite direction
if they were faced with
15 kids under three.
These are monsters.
I don't know what
to do with them.
So finding that match
between talent and energy
is a very important
part of our journey
to personal fulfillment.
It turns out that
our communities need
all of these things as well.
We need people to be fulfilling
these different roles.
So if you have an
educational system that's
based on a narrow
view of ability,
on conformity in
that sense-- and I
don't mean social conformity,
and I'm not saying
we should all go on the
streets and riot all the time.
I mean, it's a nice
idea in principle,
but it is also really nice when
the trains turn up on time.
We know this to be true.
That's a different discussion
about social conformity.
I'm talking about the
conformity that's built
into our conception of ability.
So it's important to push that.
But it's also important
to recognize that this
is true of our life trajectory.
When your dad says
be an accountant,
or when anybody's parents
says don't do this, do that.
You won't get a job doing that.
You should do this instead.
They're standing these
days on very shaky ground,
and it's true for two reasons.
One of them is that no life
goes that way, necessarily.
We all make our lives up.
They're all inventions.
We all create them.
And if I've learned anything
from speaking to people,
it's that most
people end up doing
something they never thought
of when they were in school.
I ask whole rooms for this.
I do a lot of events.
And the other week, I was in
a room with about 5,000 people
there.
And I said to them,
how many of you
now are doing what
you thought you'd
be doing when you were 15?
Like, two hands go up.
And they're people
who might say,
well, I always wanted to
be a doctor, and I am one.
But even then, they
couldn't have anticipated
the work they've done,
the places they've been,
the life they've actually had,
what their CV really looks
like.
But for most people, life
is a constant process
of improvisation.
And it's a kind of dance of
the opportunity, and interest,
and circumstance, and
choices, and luck.
I mean, luck happens.
Serendipity happens.
Random things get
thrown into the mix
that you just didn't
expect, good and bad.
And you deal with
that as best you can.
And along the way, you
compose a biography.
And all of them are improbable.
As I say, you don't
get your resume
with your birth certificate.
You make this up
as you go along.
I mean, you try to make
it look like a plan
when you write in
to apply for a job,
because you don't want to
convey the chaos you're actually
living through.
So you try to impose
an order on it.
So what that's line?
Isn't it about God
laughing at our plans?
But that is, I think,
certainly true.
So there's that.
It was always true that people
who achieve great things
in life-- and I don't mean that
they have to be great forever,
but live a life they become
content with and happy
they've lived--
not always, but very often
take the road less traveled
and find themselves
on a path they hadn't
anticipated when they set out.
It's why I did a book called
"Finding Your Element."
And I talk about it there is
a quest, and it's a good word.
Because a quest is a
journey of intention
but with no clear
sense of the path.
I mean, you'll be
heading back, no doubt,
to your home in the next few
days, and that's not a quest.
You know where it is.
You'll be pretty amazed if you
didn't show up there ready.
I mean, you may get
delayed on the way,
but it's not like
you're looking for it.
Just, it's a journey
you're going to take.
But a quest is one where you
set out in hope and expectation
but you may not know
that you're going to find
what you're looking for.
But your journey is
intentional, and you're
prepared to do what
it takes to get there.
It's the hero's journey
that we all end up taking.
So that's true anyway.
That was always true.
And I think, given how
short and uncertain
our lives are, then recognizing
that we have responsibilities
for other people, that we want
to live responsible lives as
well as adventurous ones,
we owe it to ourselves
to live a life that
adds up to something.
I did an event a while
ago with the Dalai Lama.
And he said something
to that effect.
As he said, "to be born
at all is a miracle.
So what you going to
do with your life?"
And it's true.
The chance of you being
here are vanishingly small,
and far fewer people
make it than don't.
So we've got 80, 90 years with
a falling wind at the moment.
So what you going to do with it?
And that's what "The
Element" books are about.
But there's another
reason just now
which is the old certainties
are broken down for all of us.
The idea that if you do well
at school, get a degree,
and then follow a
sensible occupation,
that will lead you in
due course to a pension
and a life of comfort
and three cruises a year
is simply not true.
It was a short-lived
fiction for a small group
of people in a particular
moment in our history.
Simply not true now, and
there were reasons for it.
One of them is that we are a 7
and 1/2 billion people heading
for 10 billion, that we don't
know if the planet can sustain
us as we live now.
The chances are it won't.
We have bigger issues to be
contending with right now
than that.
Secondly, a lot of these
occupations are disappearing.
And the original
Industrial Revolution
has given way to a new one,
artificial intelligence.
I think that's a misconception,
but artificial intelligence
will, in all probability,
wash away millions of jobs
that we thought previously only
human beings could do, jobs
that the current educational
system is preoccupied
with preparing people for.
And the idea that you'll have
a secure job as an accountant
is simply tenuous
at the very best.
So if people want to be
realistic about our career
chances and the
lives we might lead,
that is part of what
I'm arguing for.
I'm not arguing for a bigger
emphasis on creativity,
and curiosity, and
diversity, because I
think these are fanciful,
romantic notions
and want to be nice.
I think these are also
hard-headed economic arguments
now as well as social ones.
If we want people to
live a life of some kind
of economic security
and social stability,
we need to look at how
the world is shifting,
and it's shifting
radically and quickly.
And this education system
wasn't designed for this world.
It's why we have to rethink
and go back to basics.
And I think it's a very
pragmatic argument now as well
as a principled one to say that
we should put people in touch
with their real
talents, and then
let them make the life that
they are best able to make.
>>JAMES: It's a
beautiful statement.
Then probably my
last question here
as we wrap up, because you've
touched on all of the points
that I've covered
here, is practically
speaking, how do we do it?
Do we meditate?
Do we go out and do
more of what we love?
Do we find space for
the things that we love?
What is a real, practical
application for somebody?
Because in theory,
I get the concept.
>>KEN: Yeah, which
is buy my books.
It's all sorted at that point.
Just do that.
[LAUGHS] Well, firstly,
people have often
said to me that they
like my theories,
but what about the practice?
And I have a couple
of responses to that.
I mean, one of them is
they're not theories,
and they're not mine,
[LAUGHS] if they were.
I've worked in education
all my adult life.
And this isn't
something I've just kind
of turned my attention to.
And I haven't been sitting in
a library thinking about it.
I've worked with school
systems, schools, teachers, run
projects, traveled the
planet, worked in school
districts of every sort.
I've worked alongside
teachers, trained teachers,
worked with kids groups,
taught in universities,
and thought about it, and
talked a lot of people about it,
and seen a lot.
And I'm told about what works.
I'm talking about the
forms of education
which are rooted in our
best understanding of how
people flourish.
And it's pretty clear to
say now a lot of people
are not flourishing.
We're living in a time when one
of the most Sirius epidemics,
one the most serious
threats to human health
and well-being around
the world is depression.
Depression at a time when
we are materially better
off than at any time in
the history of our species.
I mean, we're all better off.
We're not all living
at the same level.
But for the most part, certainly
in the developed countries
and in many of the
developing countries,
a great majority of
people are living
at a level of
material comfort that
was inconceivable at the
beginning of the Industrial
Revolution for the vast
majority people on the planet.
And I'm think about mostly
my grandparents, who did not
have the devices, the gadgets,
the access to the comforts,
to electricity, to the
things that we simply
take for granted.
There's never been a time when
we've been materially better
situated than we are now.
I know that the
wealth gap is obscene.
I know that more and more
wealth is concentrated
in fewer and fewer hands, and
we face all kinds of perils
as a consequence of that.
But nonetheless,
for most people,
the material challenges of
being alive on the planet
and knowing what to eat when
are much lighter than they
used to be.
But our spiritual lives
are a mess in most cases,
and there are all kinds
of reasons for it.
But people lack a
sense of well-being,
lack of sense of fulfillment.
And that, to me, seems to be
one of the greatest challenges
that we currently face.
And education isn't going to
be the answer to all of it,
but it has to be part
of that solution.
So what I've been looking
at are the conditions
in which people flourish.
Well, there are various
of them out there,
and one is doing work that we
find satisfying, fulfilling,
and we think has a value,
not just to ourselves,
but to other people that's
inherently interesting,
and valuable, and worthwhile.
Another is having some
sense of financial security,
whether it's through
personal wealth
or collective social
responsibility.
One is having an overall
sense of purpose in our lives,
that we have a reason to be
alive and to continue living.
And that often comes
from serving other people
rather than just
serving ourselves.
Another is having a sense
of physical well-being,
feeling physically fit.
And a lot of people, as
you know better than most,
are living their
lives which are bathed
in toxins of various sorts
and created a hostile chemical
environment for ourselves.
So these aren't theories
in the sense of it's
a hypothesis I've been
kind of figuring out
on some retreat somewhere.
I have thought what I
think for a very long time.
I keep challenging it.
But I've seen schools that
have transformed themselves.
I get messages from people,
I meet people at events.
I travel around the
world, and I see schools
that have been transformed.
People who come up,
whole districts.
And I was recently at a school
district where they said,
we will change
everything that we
are doing now based
on stuff we have read
that you've been promoting.
Not just me.
I'm acting as a voice, I think,
for a lot of other people
in this respect.
I mean, just for odd reasons,
I find myself in that position
and set out to do it.
So I'm trying to
promote conditions
that I think are time-tested
under which people flourish.
Not conditions
under which people
can be guaranteed,
therefore, to get
great academic qualifications,
get PhDs, and go off and do
a postdoc someone.
I'm talking about
conditions that we
know are conducive
to human well-being.
Secondly, there is no
single way to do it.
There are principles
on which to do it.
You don't replace a standardized
system with another one.
If we're serious
about diversity,
there are a million
routes to success.
But there are a couple
of core principles here.
One of them is that education
has to be personalized.
By that, I don't mean by people
sitting in front of a computer,
going through like rats, as
a friend of mine once put it,
"rats down a maze,
individualized."
Education has to be
rooted in relationships.
It has to be one in which
the experiences that we offer
are a conduit to the
person we're dealing with.
Medicine is becoming
more personalized.
I have a car outside.
I've had it for a couple of
years now, quite a few years.
There's nothing
unusual about it,
except it's probably the only
one of its type in the sense
that it's an off-the-rack car.
But by the time I tell them
all the triddles that I wanted,
out of all the
choices they gave me,
this color, that upholstery,
this sound system,
all the stuff that's
in the catalog,
it turns out there are a
million versions of the car.
So you can customize your car.
We ought about to
customize our education
system to meet the needs.
So it should be personalized.
It should be customized.
And the other thing
to say about it
is that there is a huge
amount of room for innovation
in the system as it is.
A lot of what goes on
in our school systems
is not the result
of legislation.
It's the result of
habit and ritual.
There is nothing anywhere,
really, in most of our systems
that requires that we
educate kids by age group.
We just do, because we think
you have to, but you don't.
And outside of schools, we
wouldn't think of doing that.
When kids leave
school at 3:00 o'clock
in the afternoon
or 4:00 o'clock,
we don't say, now, all
the four-year-olds,
be sure to go over there.
Keep away from eight-year-olds.
Bad things happen, we know.
Communities are
intergenerational.
We don't have to divide
the data subjects.
We just do.
You don't have to.
There are lots of great
schools that don't do that
and having wonderful
success as a result.
So my answer is that we need
to look at the principals,
and then we need to look at
examples of good practice
around the world and where
it's not only feasible,
but it is already happening.
There is change happening.
It's a question of whether we
can make it happen long enough.
I mean, if you think
of your own work,
you could look at
the food industry.
And a lot of people,
well, they're
throwing their
hands up about this
and say, how can you
possibly change this?
Well, the fact is, you can
if you give people a better
argument, if you open their
eyes to more profound principles
of human welfare
and flourishing,
if you persuade them
in the right way
that this is a better way to
do things, and then show them
how it can be done, how
the people are doing it.
And then you have to
depend on people's goodwill
and their own determination to
do things better for themselves
and the people they work with.
But then movements start to
happen, and they do happen.
And you can see it now.
You can see it in
the environmental
with Greta Thunberg
and the rest.
One person becomes--
a dozen people
becomes several thousand,
and then you have a movement.
And I think if there's
the appetite for change,
and the impulse for change,
and I feel it happening,
then the idea is right,
that the practices are there
to help make it a reality.
>>JAMES: Fantastic.
Ken, you're a gentleman,
scholar, and a force for good.
Appreciate your time so much.
And I thank you for
sharing with us.
>>KEN: Did we cover
the right stuff?
>>JAMES: We covered
so much great stuff.
Very happy.
Thank you so much.
[GENTLE MUSIC]